# Defending Pseudonyms

> “Man is least himself when he talks in his own person. Give him a mask, and he will tell you the truth.” — Oscar Wilde

Mark Zuckerberg said in 2010: [“You have only one identity. Having two identities for yourself is an example of a lack of integrity.”](http://www.michaelzimmer.org/2010/05/14/facebooks-zuckerberg-having-two-identities-for-yourself-is-an-example-of-a-lack-of-integrity/) Despite this contradicting everything we know about self-presentation from [sociology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Presentation_of_Self_in_Everyday_Life) and [neuroscience](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incognito:_The_Secret_Lives_of_the_Brain), in the past decade Zuckerberg’s vision of social life, where most of one’s online and offline activity can be linked directly to one’s legal name, has become reality. 

But pseudonymity is having a comeback. Cryptocurrencies enable people to participate in the economy without having to authenticate with their legal name. And recent data breaches, e.g. that of Equifax, provide as convincing an argument as ever for taking control of one’s personal data away from identity brokers.

For pseudonymity to gain mass adoption, however, the following things will need to happen: (1) a significant reduction in the effort required to communicate and transact pseudonymously, (2) a change in the public perception of pseudonymity as the refuge of misogynist and racist trolls, (3) a sticky call-to-action for going pseudonymous that is less about negative freedoms (e.g. “pseudonyms enable freedom from mass surveillance”) and more about positive ones (“pseudonyms enable freedom to explore new avenues of self-expression”). This essay will focus on (2) and (3), specifically the question of how to design an effective strategy for fighting the negative perception of pseudonymity and promoting its benefits.

A good place to start investigating the benefits of pseudonymity would be the [open letter written by the Electronic Frontier Foundation and The Nameless Coalition](https://www.eff.org/document/appendix-october-5-2015-coalition-letter-facebook) (consisting of LGBT, women’s, and digital rights organizations) against the social platform’s real name policy in 2015. The letter’s appendix identified a list of groups that are actively disadvantaged by Facebook’s real name policy, for instance: 
* Native Americans, who frequently get locked out of their accounts because their surnames are not recognized by Facebook as proper names,
* human rights activists and journalists reporting in places where would risk state repression if they used their real names, 
* LGBT activists from countries where coming out publicly could lead to imprisonment or even the death penalty, 
* sex workers who are trying to keep their professional and personal lives separate, 
* domestic violence survivors that want to protect themselves from their abusers.

Adding more visibility to the struggles faced by those groups would help advance the moral cause for pseudonyms.

Another strategy for changing the conversation around pseudonyms would be to highlight important intellectual works in history that were published pseudonymously. There are countless historical examples of authors, scientists, and inventors using ‘pen names’ to broadcast ideas and gauge reactions to their work without being worried about the impact it would have to their reputation. Male pseudonyms have enabled women authors, such as the Brontë sisters, to get their works read in an era of sexist publishers. It also allowed David Hume, arguably the greatest Anglo-Saxon philosopher of all time, to publish “A Treatise of Human Nature,” a work that went against the ideas of powerful religious leaders of the time. In other cases, such as J. K. Rowling’s release of the crime novel “The Cuckoo’s Calling” under the name Robert Galbraith, pseudonymity allowed acclaimed creators to explore a new genre or art-form without being limited by the expectations built up from their previous work. Finally, literary authors like Fernando Pessoa and musical artists like David Bowie used a variety of pseudonyms (or, as Pessoa called them, “heteronyms”) to express the fact that, borrowing a verse from Walt Whitman, they are large, they contain multitudes.

We have established how disadvantaged groups and intellectual mavericks can benefit from the use of pseudonyms. They constitute the moral backbone of the pseudonym movement, providing widely agreeable examples for how pseudonymity can be a force for good. We proceed to identify pragmatic arguments for pseudonymity, i.e. arguments for how everyone, not just people at the edges of the distribution, could benefit from a pseudonym-by-default world. 

We first need to answer the question: do average people feel constrained by having to use their real name online? One piece of evidence towards “yes” answer comes from Facebook’s [self-censorship study](https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM13/paper/viewFile/6093/6350), which measured how often the users of the social network decide not to publish a status update after typing it. The study found that 71% of Facebook’s users have engaged in self-censorship at some point and that one third of all posts on Facebook have been self-censored. Even though a degree of self-censorship is healthy (e.g. people controlling themselves from publishing something regrettable in an emotional moment) it is likely that the high reported level of self-censorship can only be explained in relation to the perceived risk of saying the wrong thing could have on one’s relationships and employment opportunities. The idea that all the data we generate online will one day come back to haunt us is what Kate Crawford calls [“surveillant anxiety,”](https://thenewinquiry.com/the-anxieties-of-big-data/) and it’s something that “everyone knows, but nobody talks about.” 

Data breaches, which at this point have become a weekly news item, provide the a great anchor for a discussion about identity data ownership. The Equifax breach shows the immense risk asymmetry between users and identity brokers: whereas one’s financial reputation can be ruined by something as trivial as a forgetting to return a book, [a credit agency can leak the information of virtually every adult in the United States and face very few consequences](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/11/opinion/equifax-accountability-security.html). It doesn’t even take a data leak for an interested party to learn everything about you, since third-party data exchanges can sell user data with very limited regulatory oversight. For instance, Cambridge Analytica, a political marketing firm employed by the Brexit and Trump campaigns, [claimed to have used third-party user data to build personality profiles for every single adult in the United States](https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/mg9vvn/how-our-likes-helped-trump-win).

Digital rights organizations recommend a variety of tools to evade this kind of state and corporate surveillance (e.g. Signal, Tor, VPNs, etc.). A problem with such recommendations is their defensive framing: they’re a way to protect oneself from harm of surveillance, and not an avenue to new, interesting experiences. That makes them unlikely to appeal to anyone except the highly interested (e.g. privacy rights advocates) and the highly motivated (e.g. whistleblowers). A movement around pseudonyms should instead focus on the liberatory, self-exploratory affordances of pseudonyms. Positive stereotypes from the popular imagination can be channeled, such as that of the comic book character with a secret superhero persona. Participatory events, online and offline, where people briefly get to hold an alternate identity might provide a good strategy for showing the psychological benefits of experiencing the world through a different point of view. One example would be BeAnotherLab’s [Machine To Be Another](http://www.themachinetobeanother.org/?page_id=820) project, which uses VR to make participants feel as if they possess a different body.

A final strategy would be to engage directly with communities of emerging technologies to pre-emptively make sure that the right norms around identity management are established early on in the design of those platforms. Just like the move from web apps to mobile apps led to an increase in centralization, intervening early in the design of the next computing platform (namely, VR/AR) could be more impactful than belatedly trying to correct the historical decisions behind the current one. Publishing essays and prototypes that make the argument against centralized identity in VR/AR might convince the early adopters of those platforms, who are more likely to be privacy-conscious than mainstream users who will arrive later, to take personal data ownership seriously and not let centralized identity brokers such as Facebook (which, by the way, is already pushing for VR to become a real name platform with little principled resistance) get away with dictating how identity should be handled.

We have explored five different strategies for promote the benefits of pseudonymity. The first two aim to establish the moral goodness of pseudonymity, highlighting how (1) it shields people from abusers and repressive states, (2) it has historically enabled authors, artists, and scientists to publish radical ideas or try out new forms of expression without fear of damage to their reputation. The next two promote the benefits of pseudonymity applicable to everyone, namely  that (3) pseudonymity reduces self-censorship, (4) pseudonymity enables self-exploration. The last strategy involves (5) directly engaging with the tech community to influence the design of emerging platforms towards principles of pseudonymity.
